Okay.
NOTE CONF
Good afternoon.
Uh, themes from James Bond, obviously.
NOTE CONF
Um, right.
Today I'm going to talk to you about, uh, type
NOTE CONF
classes.
So, uh, this is a, you know, yet another feature
NOTE CONF
of Haskell, and you've seen them.
You've seen them coming up in, in code already, but
NOTE CONF
not explained properly.
So type classes are used to describe classes of types
NOTE CONF
that have something in common.
Um, example uh, that you've seen already is the EC
NOTE CONF
type class and the show type class.
And um, a couple of others might have popped up.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And this is another idea from Haskell that's been adopted
NOTE CONF
by some other programming languages.
And it's used to deal with situations in which there
NOTE CONF
are certain operations, like equality, that can be used for
many types, but not all types.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Everybody paying attention.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is another, another, uh, thing in, um, in
NOTE CONF
Haskell's type system that, uh, that I'm telling you about
and by now you will have.
NOTE CONF
Whoops.
I don't know why the lights go off in this
NOTE CONF
room sometimes.
Um, by now you will have heard so much about
NOTE CONF
types and Haskell.
So you will have got the idea that that they're
NOTE CONF
important.
Okay, but there's different kinds.
NOTE CONF
And you may be by now.
Can you stop talking, please?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
By now, you may be a little bit bewildered by
NOTE CONF
all the different kinds of types and what they have
to do with each other.
NOTE CONF
So let me try to take a step back and
explain before I go any further.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we've got in Haskell and then and well we've
NOTE CONF
got values and expressions okay.
And these are things like zero and uh one plus
NOTE CONF
one times.
Uh uh x and, um, uh, empty list.
NOTE CONF
And, um, the function plus is a is a is
a value.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And um, expressions and values have types.
NOTE CONF
And types.
Um there are built in types like int and uh
NOTE CONF
lists like the list of booleans and um things like
uh ordered binary trees, you know, all sorts of types
NOTE CONF
you will have, uh, you will have seen oops.
Uh, you know, there are, uh, function types and lists
NOTE CONF
of functions.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And so forth.
Um, so these are all types and values and expressions
NOTE CONF
are classified by types.
So we write for example zero colon colon int and
NOTE CONF
you know empty list Colon.
Colon, list of bool or list of int or list
NOTE CONF
of bull arrow int.
Okay, and some of these are built in.
NOTE CONF
And so built in things like int and intolerable.
Um there are type synonyms.
NOTE CONF
So these are things like uh type um name equals
string.
NOTE CONF
In the um last tutorial exercise when you were doing
um variables with uh with, with names which were strings
NOTE CONF
or um type uh predicate A equals a arrow bool.
So this was just giving a name to A to
NOTE CONF
a type or a type expression for some reason.
And then there were the algebraic data types.
NOTE CONF
So these were these were built in these were these
were synonyms for existing types.
NOTE CONF
And these were actually, um, defining a new type.
So something like tree uh equals um, empty or, or
NOTE CONF
you can't read.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Thank you.
Uh, oops.
NOTE CONF
Better.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, node applied to, uh, tree and tree.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So algebraic data types defining a new type with constructors
okay.
NOTE CONF
And what I'm going to tell you about today is
type classes.
NOTE CONF
Uh, things like EQ um show ord there's going to
be more.
NOTE CONF
So these are um.
They're groupings of types okay.
NOTE CONF
That share characteristic.
And I will explain all that.
NOTE CONF
So you will have seen these in places like uh
well they used to qualify types.
NOTE CONF
So there are things like well I'll explain.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, and then and then finally I've shown you, um,
abstract data types or data abstractions.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And this is not a new kind of type.
NOTE CONF
This is a way of using Haskell.
To encapsulate, um, to encapsulate, uh, representations.
NOTE CONF
Sorry, I can't write uh, to, to to encapsulate representations
of data.
NOTE CONF
So, um, so I showed you four versions of sets.
That is to say, four representations of sets, two different
NOTE CONF
list representations and two different tree representations.
And so data abstract data types or data abstractions is
NOTE CONF
a way of using things in Haskell actually the module
system to encapsulate those.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that's the spectrum of things that have to do
NOTE CONF
with types.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And um, I think that's all there is as far
as types of concern in Haskell might be that I'm
NOTE CONF
forgetting something, but if it is, if that's the case,
then, uh, it's not something I'm going to be talking
NOTE CONF
about in in future lectures.
It would be some advanced thing that maybe I haven't
NOTE CONF
learned about myself yet.
Don't know.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So anyway, so there's that.
NOTE CONF
Um, and so here we are with type classes.
And let me show you.
NOTE CONF
I'll just leave that up for a second in case
you're still reading it.
NOTE CONF
Um.
So here's an example, or at least an example of
NOTE CONF
our motivating example.
Okay, so you've seen this function before.
NOTE CONF
This is the membership function for uh, for lists.
So um, uh, looking just at the stuff over here,
NOTE CONF
the type says we take a, we take a value
and we take a list of that kind of values,
NOTE CONF
and, and we produce a boolean.
And the idea is that if that value is in
NOTE CONF
that list, then the answer is true.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So membership for ordinary lists of values.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, but as you've seen, the type of that has
a sort of qualifier at the beginning it says, um,
NOTE CONF
that that's the type.
But I require a type of values a which has
NOTE CONF
this property that it you can do equality on it
okay.
NOTE CONF
So I've mentioned this before.
I've said it's a requirement when you use this function
NOTE CONF
that you have a type like this.
Um I said maybe that there are some types that
NOTE CONF
don't satisfy that, which is why we have to give
the qualification.
NOTE CONF
And I said that I would explain this later properly.
So later has now arrived.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to explain this properly okay.
So here goes.
NOTE CONF
So here are three definitions of of of this function
okay I like to do this.
NOTE CONF
So there's higher order version.
There's a comprehension version the recursion version.
NOTE CONF
All three of these ways of doing it I mean
you can you can read this code I mean it's
NOTE CONF
familiar to you by now I think how you would
do this using fold using a comprehension with an Or
NOTE CONF
at the front or using a recursive definition.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, each one of these features the equality function somewhere.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, you know, we, uh, here, we, uh, we map,
uh, we use map to go down the list to
NOTE CONF
check to see whether a value is equal to X
or not.
NOTE CONF
You get a list of booleans, and then you accumulate,
uh, whether one of those is true or not using
NOTE CONF
disjunction.
Um, here you're, you're you're doing the same thing using
NOTE CONF
comprehension.
You're checking to see for every element in Y whether
NOTE CONF
or not sorry, every element in Y's, whether x is
equal to it.
NOTE CONF
You get a bunch of booleans you do or to
get the truth value whether one of those is true.
NOTE CONF
And here's recursive definition each one uses equality.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, no matter how you write this function, you have
to use equality.
NOTE CONF
There's no getting around it, okay?
You have to compare the value you're given with the
NOTE CONF
values and the list to find out if it's there
or not.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And so this is why this this type definition, this,
NOTE CONF
this type of um, this type signature has this qualification
in it.
NOTE CONF
You have to use equality.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And um, and so when we use it, uh, it
works if we've got a type which has equality, okay.
NOTE CONF
Which is what the, uh, type signature says.
So for example, integers.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Checking to see whether that number one is in that
NOTE CONF
list.
The answer is false okay.
NOTE CONF
Equality works on integers.
We know that okay.
NOTE CONF
Same thing for for for for characters okay.
Equality works for characters.
NOTE CONF
So you can check to see if a character is
in a string or not.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, same goes for pairs consisting of integers and and
NOTE CONF
and characters like here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we can check to see whether this pair is
in this list of pairs okay.
NOTE CONF
And same for lists, uh, you know, lists of characters
or strings.
NOTE CONF
So we can check to see if a string is
in a list of strings.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But.
NOTE CONF
For functions it doesn't work.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
We can't check to see whether this function.
Is in this list of functions.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
These are both lists of functions.
NOTE CONF
So this is a list of function.
So oops.
NOTE CONF
Um you know the negation function and the function that
negates and then and then negates the result okay.
NOTE CONF
Maybe this is a a function on integers okay.
You or you take the you know you give it
NOTE CONF
three.
It gives you minus three.
NOTE CONF
This one gives you minus minus three which is equal
to three Okay, so, um, it doesn't work on functions.
NOTE CONF
Okay?
Haskell refuses to test equality on functions.
NOTE CONF
Um, why is that?
Okay, well, the error message says I can't do equality
NOTE CONF
on functions, and it suggests maybe you wanted to define
it yourself somehow.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Why doesn't Haskell test equality on functions?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, because it's it's.
NOTE CONF
Well, it's kind of impossible depending on your point of
view.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So think of it.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
You want to check?
NOTE CONF
Let's suppose this is a list of functions on integers.
You want to check whether a function on integers is
NOTE CONF
in a list of functions as integers okay.
So checking equality you have a function on the integers.
NOTE CONF
You want to check to see if it's equal to
the first one or not.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Checking that means, um, One way to do it would
NOTE CONF
be to check all of the values of of of
that function for all inputs.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
You check to see whether that function applied to zero
NOTE CONF
is equal to this other function applied to zero.
And then you check if that's true.
NOTE CONF
You check to see if it's it's true for one
and so forth.
NOTE CONF
And there's an infinite number of integers actually.
Um int int is 64 bit integers.
NOTE CONF
So it's not infinite but it's very large.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh, so um, so Haskell just refuses, you could, you
could say, well, you know, let's look at this example
NOTE CONF
here.
This is the entity function.
NOTE CONF
Um, and this thing here on integers, this is also
the identity function.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
It negates and then negates again which gets you back
NOTE CONF
to to x okay.
And so you could say, well using some fancy algebraic
NOTE CONF
manipulation system that, that cleverly knows about, you know, the
fact that, um, negation Twice gives you the same thing
NOTE CONF
as not negating at all, then you could recognise that
that is actually equal to this.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And that's true.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But in general that doesn't work.
NOTE CONF
It's an undecidable problem whether to algebraic expressions over integers
are the same.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So anyway um, uh, you could also say, well, for
NOTE CONF
booleans, uh, functions on booleans are finite, you know, small
finite functions.
NOTE CONF
And so you could check those anyway.
Uh, Haskell just says, no, I'm not going to do
NOTE CONF
it.
Go away.
NOTE CONF
Uh, if you want, you can define it yourself and
you can actually define it yourself if you want to.
NOTE CONF
And I'll show you, you know, the mechanism for doing
that.
NOTE CONF
It says add an instance declaration.
Um, you can actually do that.
NOTE CONF
You could say you could define it to say that
equality on on functions is always false or it's always.
NOTE CONF
True.
Or you could be fancy and you could say for
NOTE CONF
integers, provided it's the first, the values from zero up
to ten coincide will regard functions as equal.
NOTE CONF
You could do that if you want, but Haskell doesn't
have it built in, which means that you get error
NOTE CONF
messages like this when you try to apply functions like
LM to lists of functions.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is this was an example involving an equality
NOTE CONF
type class.
Here is how it works when you try to apply
NOTE CONF
it here is here is um defining inequality the equality
type class and instances of it okay.
NOTE CONF
This is actually uh not the full definition.
I'm going to get to the full definition in a
NOTE CONF
minute.
But um.
NOTE CONF
Uh, just put that back up on both screens.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Um, this is a slightly simplified version, but, um.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh.
Never mind.
NOTE CONF
So this is defining the equality type class.
If it wasn't built in, it is built in.
NOTE CONF
So you don't have to do this, but this is
how you would do it if it wasn't built in.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
It says, um, I want a new type class and
NOTE CONF
it's called EC.
Uh, capital letters or initial capital letter.
NOTE CONF
And you're saying that, uh, EC is a type class,
uh, which for a given type A, um, uh, it
NOTE CONF
requires that you've got an equality function.
So with this name and this type and this type
NOTE CONF
involves, of course, the type A.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So it says, uh, for in order to have a,
an instance of a equality of this equality type class,
NOTE CONF
you need to type a and you need a inequality
function with that name.
NOTE CONF
And then you can once you've defined that, that's the
equality type class defined.
NOTE CONF
Then you can define instances of the type class.
For example here we define um int and char.
NOTE CONF
And uh well coming up this is a little bit
more complicated pairs and lists as being um instances of
NOTE CONF
this type class.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So first of all, int um in order to declare
something as a type is an instance of a type
NOTE CONF
class, you have to say what's the what's the equality
okay.
NOTE CONF
And so for int the equality is a is a
built in function in Haskell, which is basically um, uh,
NOTE CONF
referencing um, built in, you know, in the hardware, there
is a way of comparing integers for equality.
NOTE CONF
And so that's just the name of that, of that
hardware instruction for, for comparing integers for equality.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So you just say instance um EC that's the type
NOTE CONF
class, int is the name that you is the type
that you want to declare as an instance of that
NOTE CONF
type class.
And then you say what the definition of the required
NOTE CONF
function is.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
There might be more than one function here.
You'll see examples of that coming up.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
In this case just one uh for for char we
NOTE CONF
can say, well, uh, two characters x and y are
equal if and only if, um, the character codes for
NOTE CONF
those characters are equal.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Remember this is function ord, which, um, uh, for every
character gave you a number, which was the character code.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And it's a 1 to 1 mapping.
NOTE CONF
So um, so you can compare, you can, you can
convert both of the characters to integers.
NOTE CONF
And then here you're using integer equality.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
These two these two expressions are integers.
And that's integer equality which was the thing you just
NOTE CONF
defined a minute ago.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
With me so far.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Uh, slightly more complicated.
Are these two last these two examples here.
NOTE CONF
And this is declaring pairs as an instance of EC.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh, but in order for a pair, a pair type,
you know, uh, first component, type A, second component, type
NOTE CONF
B, in order for that to be an equality type,
you need to have equality on A and B.
NOTE CONF
Obviously you need to compare.
You want to compare the components of a pair.
NOTE CONF
You need to be able to compare, uh, you know,
if you want to compare the the pair, you need
NOTE CONF
to compare the components of the pair.
So in order to compare whether you know UV is
NOTE CONF
equal to x, y or not So you as of
type A, uh, v is of type B.
NOTE CONF
X is of type A, y is of type B.
In order to compare those two things for equality, you
NOTE CONF
need to compare you with x and v with y.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Component wise uh, equality okay.
And this this equality here, this equality here is, um,
NOTE CONF
this is a quality on a.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Because U and V are the first components of a
value of type you comma b and this and this
NOTE CONF
type and this equality here.
Uh this is over values of type b okay.
NOTE CONF
So in order to in order to compute equality on
uh pairs of type A comma B, you need equality
NOTE CONF
on A, you need equality on B.
And that's the reason why you have this kind of
NOTE CONF
conditional, uh, type instance declaration.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
It says, um, we've got a quality on Paris, provided
we have got a quality on the types forming the
NOTE CONF
pair and the same thing down here.
So if you you got that.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So for example, you can't compute equality of pairs of
NOTE CONF
functions or pairs of a function and a boolean.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Because you wouldn't have one of these um conditions satisfied.
And then um, same sort of idea with lists.
NOTE CONF
You can't, uh, get equality on listening unless you have
equality on the components of the list.
NOTE CONF
Right?
So you're saying that, um, uh, list of a is
NOTE CONF
an instance of EC provided A is an instance of
EQ and here is a recursive definition of what equality
NOTE CONF
does.
So, you know, you've got two lists.
NOTE CONF
Preparing for quality.
You you go down the list and compare the elements
NOTE CONF
one at a time.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And that's a little recursive definition which does that.
Um, equality on the left here is the equality on
NOTE CONF
lists.
Equality here.
NOTE CONF
This is equality on the components of the list.
So this is a quality on a and equality here.
NOTE CONF
This is the recursive call to this function we're defining.
So this is equality on lists of a okay.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is an example of defining a type class
NOTE CONF
and instances of a type class.
Um new syntax is uh is this, uh, this this
NOTE CONF
thing class.
Uh, you know, class class name type variable where and
NOTE CONF
then and then a list of a list of function
signatures.
NOTE CONF
Function type signatures okay.
And then instance uh type class type where and then
NOTE CONF
a, a list of um definitions of those functions.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And um, you know, you can use recursive functions and
so forth.
NOTE CONF
These can be, these can be as complicated as you
want.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that's kind of the basic idea.
NOTE CONF
And I'm going to skip a couple of slides.
I'll just for those of you who want to look
NOTE CONF
at this kind of thing, um, this is this is
explaining how, how type classes are, um, definable in terms
NOTE CONF
of features that are already in Haskell.
So this is this is like saying it's actually just
NOTE CONF
a convenience, um, for something you could write yourself if
you wanted to.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, this is explained in the textbook in a and
NOTE CONF
I think a nicer way than it is in this
slide.
NOTE CONF
But if you want, you can look.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So let me do this now properly.
This is this is now the actual, uh, definition of
NOTE CONF
EC and a couple of other type classes, Ord and
Sho.
NOTE CONF
So we're defining EC AUD.
And show.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Three three definitions here okay.
NOTE CONF
So EC I showed you a second ago but I
said that was not the full definitions.
NOTE CONF
This is actually um the full definition here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um the other one was a little bit simplified.
So actually EC the type class gives you equality and
NOTE CONF
also inequality okay.
This is the negated equality.
NOTE CONF
So there's actually two functions required there.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
However, and this is this is a typical situation with
type classes.
NOTE CONF
Um, it turns out you can define one of these
functions in terms of the other one.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And so um, you know, negated equality is uh, you
NOTE CONF
do equality and then you apply not okay.
So this is actually part of the definition of this
NOTE CONF
type class.
That negated equality is defined by default as the negation
NOTE CONF
of the normal equality okay.
This is a default.
NOTE CONF
That means that when you define an instance of this
of this um, of this class, you can, if you
NOTE CONF
want, define a different, uh, a different give a different
definition of, of type inequality.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And this is a typical this is a, this is
NOTE CONF
a thing you can do with with type classes.
Here you have a type class Ord where you've got
NOTE CONF
four things that are required in order for something to
be, uh, an instance of AUD.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
However, you only actually need one of them, and the
NOTE CONF
other three are defined by default in terms of that
one.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
The one that you're that you really need is this
NOTE CONF
one.
And um, and the others are defined like this using
NOTE CONF
um.
Using that one and equality.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Here's equality being used here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Because of that and because it makes sense, uh, this
NOTE CONF
this equality, uh, is required as a condition, um, on
the definition of this type class.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
It doesn't make sense to have an order relation if
NOTE CONF
you don't have an equality relation.
That's what this is saying.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So yeah you need less than.
NOTE CONF
You need less than or equal to.
You need greater than, you need greater than or equal
NOTE CONF
to.
But it's good enough to just give less than or
NOTE CONF
equal to and to define the other ones in terms
of that.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that's equality.
NOTE CONF
That's Ord.
And then you've seen the class show, uh, coming up
NOTE CONF
in previous, um, you know, previous lectures.
This is the class of things that you can convert
NOTE CONF
to strings.
So what you need is a function called show which
NOTE CONF
turns a value into a string.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, um, yeah.
So this is the way that you can define type
NOTE CONF
classes of your own.
These three are built in.
NOTE CONF
But if you wanted to you could have define them
yourself okay.
NOTE CONF
So those are defining the type classes.
What about defining instances of these type classes.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we can define booleans as being instances of all
NOTE CONF
three of these type classes.
And here's the declaration of that.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So you know defining something as an instance of a
NOTE CONF
type class, you say uh, instance uh, the type class
name the type name where.
NOTE CONF
And then you have to give definitions of the functions
required in this case definitions.
NOTE CONF
The functions required are equality okay.
And then negated equality is provided for free.
NOTE CONF
So um this definition of equality for bool case by
case not very exciting okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, this is a definition of uh, of less than
or equal to for bool.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, the definition here is a bit arbitrary.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
It's saying that false is less than or equal to
NOTE CONF
true.
Rather than the other way around.
NOTE CONF
It's a bit arbitrary.
We could have done it the other way around.
NOTE CONF
The only reason why we do it this way is,
um, because this case.
NOTE CONF
Um, means this is actually equivalent to the implication, um,
implication on booleans.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
It's true for all for all pairs, except for true
NOTE CONF
is not less than or equal to false.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Just like true implies false is false.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is deliberate.
And I don't know whether Julian has talked about Boolean
NOTE CONF
algebras or not.
There's a concept of Boolean algebra.
NOTE CONF
If he hasn't talked about it, it's just explained in
the book.
NOTE CONF
Um, and if you want to make booleans into a
Boolean algebra, um, this is the way that you define,
NOTE CONF
um Less than or equal to.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Finally, uh, show you can define uh, bool is instance
of show using this definition.
NOTE CONF
And, um, I've used kind of English names of the
Boolean values here.
NOTE CONF
You could if you want to use a different language
or any string you want.
NOTE CONF
Really.
It's just that, um, I'm using English okay.
NOTE CONF
Any questions anybody.
Up to this point, this is all kind of, uh,
NOTE CONF
pretty easy, I think.
Just new stuff, but, um.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, pairs.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
You can define, um, that that, uh, we've already seen
NOTE CONF
this.
Actually, you can define EC, uh, you can define the
NOTE CONF
pairs or instance of EC provided the value, the, the
the types involved in the pair, both of those are
NOTE CONF
instances of EQ.
Okay, I've shown you that definition already.
NOTE CONF
Um, here's a definition of of of of pairs being
an instance of ord.
NOTE CONF
So Ord is this some class where we've got less
than or equal to and other order relations.
NOTE CONF
And the definition here of less than or equal to
is perhaps not what you'd expect.
NOTE CONF
Not sure.
I mean, if you looked at if you look at
NOTE CONF
the definition for equality, you could think, well, a similar
sort of thing.
NOTE CONF
For here we would just say that x comma y
is less than or equal to x prime comma y
NOTE CONF
prime provided x is less than or equal to x
prime and y is less than or equal to y
NOTE CONF
prime.
So that's kind of element component wise.
NOTE CONF
Um order okay.
This is a different definition.
NOTE CONF
And this is the usual one for pairs.
And it's the one that's built into Haskell.
NOTE CONF
And the motivation for this is um, I'll show you.
It's because when you extend this to lists, it's the
NOTE CONF
one that you want.
Okay, but I'll just tell you what it is for
NOTE CONF
now, okay?
We say that less than that x comma y is
NOTE CONF
less than or equal to x prime comma y prime.
If either x is less than or equal sorry x
NOTE CONF
is less than y.
Okay, then it doesn't matter what y and y prime
NOTE CONF
are, then this one is less than or equal to
that one okay.
NOTE CONF
Or x and x prime are equal and y is
less than or equal to y prime.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So um, you know, so if the first components are
NOTE CONF
equal then we look at the second components.
If the first components are not equal but the first
NOTE CONF
one is less than the second one less then not
less than or equal to.
NOTE CONF
Then we look at the second components.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And here's a show function which just puts the the
the strings for the two components.
NOTE CONF
Uh, concatenates them with a comma in between in parentheses
around them.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
These are.
NOTE CONF
I'll say it again.
These are these are built into Haskell.
NOTE CONF
So this is how you would define them if you
had to define them yourself.
NOTE CONF
And then for lists for each of these we've got
a little recursive definition.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Uh, I've shown you the one for lists for, for
NOTE CONF
um, EQ already.
Uh, for I'll just say for show.
NOTE CONF
Um, you, you kind of put the, the elements in
the list.
NOTE CONF
Turn them all into strings, concatenate them, put commas in
between and put square brackets around them.
NOTE CONF
So that's a that's the code that does that.
Okay I'm not going to look at that in detail
NOTE CONF
I want to focus on this.
Um, this um case for AUD here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is a little recursive definition of um of
NOTE CONF
less than or equal to for lists.
And what does it give you?
NOTE CONF
Um uh, okay.
Well.
NOTE CONF
Let me show you some examples.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this gives us, uh, what's, uh, the, the, the
order that you have, um, in the dictionary.
NOTE CONF
For example, bar is less than or equal to bat.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
If you look for those two words in the dictionary,
the first one will come before the second one.
NOTE CONF
And bat will be less than or equal to, um,
battery.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Because, uh, the first three.
NOTE CONF
The first three letters of this are the same as
that, but this one's longer.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And of course, um, you know, um, Aardvark.
NOTE CONF
Is less than or equal to to that.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
You can already see in the first letter that it's
going to come before that.
NOTE CONF
Um.
You know, uh.
NOTE CONF
Also something like, um.
You know, a followed by Z.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So A is less than B, so it doesn't matter
NOTE CONF
that Z is greater than A.
All right.
NOTE CONF
Second second thing.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Anyway, so this is this is the dictionary ordering.
And and this is and this is a recursive definition
NOTE CONF
of that.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And, um, if you remember what I wrote for for
pears, it's the same, you know, it's the same thing,
NOTE CONF
but generalised, you know, so B followed by, um, a
is less than or equal to, um, be followed by,
NOTE CONF
uh, you know, see.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
First things are the same.
Second one, you compare, uh, whereas, um, you know, a
NOTE CONF
comma Z is also less than or equal to b
comma c.
NOTE CONF
Sorry, I put, I put back quotes in there.
I mean, I mean ordinary quotes.
NOTE CONF
Sorry, I'm getting confused with my Haskell.
In all of these cases, I meant this kind of
NOTE CONF
quote, normal old quotes.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, right.
So dictionary ordering, also known as, uh, lexicographic ordering.
NOTE CONF
That's the sort of computer science jargon okay.
Uh, comes from the word lexicon, which is a fancy
NOTE CONF
word for dictionary.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Have you got that right?
Um, so this is the code that you would write
NOTE CONF
if you needed to define these things in Haskell.
It's built in.
NOTE CONF
Um, and, and there's even something nicer than that in
Haskell, which is that when you define I explained how
NOTE CONF
to define these three things as, as algebraic data types.
And then I said there's some magic words you can
NOTE CONF
say when you define an algebraic data type, which, um,
automatically gives you, uh, equality functions and show functions and
NOTE CONF
so forth.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, um, so if you do that with these three
data type definitions bool, pair and list with these magic
NOTE CONF
magic words at the end, deriving EQ, comma or comma
show you can.
NOTE CONF
You can also just derive one of them.
Um, so for any algebraic data type you can do
NOTE CONF
this and it will automatically give you the code.
Uh, like I've shown you.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Haskell writes it for you automatically.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Using the types, um, so, you know, uh, for example,
NOTE CONF
just looking at the last one we looked at, we
looked at lists just now, it will automatically write equality
NOTE CONF
function for this for for this type.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh, it's it's a recursive type.
The definition of equality is recursive.
NOTE CONF
Um, uh, you know, to going back to the definition,
um, uh, if you, if you've got a, A list
NOTE CONF
which is empty.
Well, let's look at this one.
NOTE CONF
You've got a list which is which is, um, built
using a cons.
NOTE CONF
Maybe I should let me let me look at the
let me look at the equality case just to make
NOTE CONF
my explanation simpler.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
List building using a cons comparing with a nil list.
Those are not going to be equal and the same
NOTE CONF
the other way around okay.
But if they're both used built using a cons, we
NOTE CONF
compare the first elements and then we look recursively at
the rest of the list.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is the automatic.
NOTE CONF
This is the the definition of EQ you get automatically
for this from this okay.
NOTE CONF
And the same for ord okay.
This is the definition you automatically get from that okay.
NOTE CONF
The definition of show is actually not the one giving
here.
NOTE CONF
This is the one that's built in for for lists
in in Haskell.
NOTE CONF
But if you were to define lists yourself and you'd
say, I want to derive show.
NOTE CONF
You'd get a you'd get a conversion to strings, which
involves the constructors, cons and nil.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But otherwise these things would give you what you'd expect.
NOTE CONF
Actually for here show would also be different would be
um, using the constructor MC pair.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so Haskell writes the code for you.
And why is that good?
NOTE CONF
Okay, first of all, I should say there are about
seven of these type classes that you can do this
NOTE CONF
for.
Haskell will build will will build the code for you
NOTE CONF
automatically.
Um, those are three of them.
NOTE CONF
Um, uh, this is good because the code is boring
and so it's nice to not have to write it.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Another reason is that, um, uh, it's good to not
NOTE CONF
write code.
If you can get if you can get it written
NOTE CONF
automatically for you.
Um, because if Haskell writes it, it'll get it right.
NOTE CONF
And if you write it, especially if it's boring, you
might get it wrong because you're bored.
NOTE CONF
Uh, writing these writing these definitions is is.
There's nothing interesting going on here.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so, um, you might make a mistake and then
your code would be wrong, and then you'd get bugs.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And so it's good that Haskell will do this for
NOTE CONF
you.
Um, to save you, work to save you.
NOTE CONF
Making mistakes.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, so that's that's a good thing.
Let me see how much time I have.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um.
NOTE CONF
I have too much stuff in the rest of this
lecture to get through, but I'll just.
NOTE CONF
I'll just hit a couple of high points and then,
um.
NOTE CONF
I mean, in general, I just want to kind of
inform you about the type classes, how they work, how
NOTE CONF
you can define them, and the rest of the lecture
is just a bunch of examples.
NOTE CONF
So, um.
So for example, you remember that I defined sets in
NOTE CONF
four different ways.
And so I can make those an instance of EC
NOTE CONF
as well if I want.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Allowing me to use equality.
This double equals sign to compare sets rather than using
NOTE CONF
the function that I've defined.
Um, for sets.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
I can just say, well, um, you know, provided I've
NOTE CONF
got an ordered type, okay.
Because my, my representation.
NOTE CONF
Well, this would be required for three of the four
representations of sets.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
If I've got an ordered an ordered type A, then
NOTE CONF
I have an equality on sets of A.
And it's and it's the equal function that I define.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And um.
NOTE CONF
And this is.
This is necessary if I want the right answer.
NOTE CONF
Because if I were to define equality using, you know,
deriving.
NOTE CONF
Sorry, deriving like this.
If I were to do that for, for, for example,
NOTE CONF
ordered trees, then the equality I get would give me
the wrong answer, because we've seen that two ordered trees
NOTE CONF
can be equal if they have the same elements but
different structure.
NOTE CONF
Okay, uh, they have to satisfy the invariant.
But it could be that the that, um, you know,
NOTE CONF
one of them is, um, uh, well different shape.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And so this gives you the ability to give the
right equality for, for, for sets.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So you can do that if you want.
NOTE CONF
I will talk about, uh, the numerical type classes.
So Haskell has a lot of different type classes for
NOTE CONF
numbers.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, so first of all, it's got a lot of
types for numbers.
NOTE CONF
You've got, you've got int which is 64 bit integers,
you've got integer spelled out which is infinite precision integers.
NOTE CONF
You've got floats which is floating point numbers.
You've got double which is double precision floating point numbers.
NOTE CONF
There are rationals that you've seen in your, um, the
tutorial involving matrices.
NOTE CONF
Um, there are complex numbers.
Um, uh, there are uh, probably some that I forgot.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So there's a lot of different kinds of numbers in
NOTE CONF
Haskell, and I don't I don't expect you to remember
all these, all these different types of numbers because they're
NOTE CONF
not important for this course.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
But they're there.
And there's also a lot of different type classes involving
NOTE CONF
numbers which kind of keep these different types in order
in a certain way.
NOTE CONF
And I also don't expect you to remember all these
because they're not important.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But you will have seen for instance, num okay.
NOTE CONF
And I just want to tell you a little bit
about what's in these, these type classes.
NOTE CONF
Um, so you would have seen num, for example, um,
at the beginning of the course, if you made a
NOTE CONF
mistake with some function that involved arithmetic, then you would
get some error message which would complain about something not
NOTE CONF
being an instance of num.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And what it was referring to is this type class
here.
NOTE CONF
So if you try to um, well, different kinds of
mistakes you can make with, with numbers.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
So num is the most basic type classes and it's,
NOTE CONF
and it's the one where you have um, uh, types
which allow addition, subtraction and multiplication and a couple of
NOTE CONF
other functions.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And, um, you know uh, not necessarily Division.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Because, um, uh, division, Division in a, in a in
a type like, like, um, float is written using this
NOTE CONF
function name and division in a, in an integer integer
division is written using this name.
NOTE CONF
So these are, these are sort of integral types like
int and these are this is for types like float
NOTE CONF
with real with an actual division function in okay.
So so um, you know you've got you've got num
NOTE CONF
which has at least additions subtraction, multiplication, negation a way
to convert things from integers to to values of that
NOTE CONF
type.
Um, you've got fractional which is um, which is Haskell's
NOTE CONF
name for things like rational numbers Um, uh, real integral,
which is Haskell's name for things like integers, which are,
NOTE CONF
um, where you have things like division and modulo.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So fairly complicated, uh, bunch of type classes here.
And you can and you can define, you know, how
NOTE CONF
num is an how float is an instance of num.
And these reference the kind of built in machine instructions
NOTE CONF
for doing, for doing um, addition of floating point numbers
and so forth.
NOTE CONF
This is all this is all built in, so you
don't have to worry about it.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But, um, well, the next thing in this lecture is
NOTE CONF
explaining how if you wanted to define natural numbers as
a, as a, as an abstract data type, which I
NOTE CONF
think I've shown you, um, you can also define, um,
that, um, wait a minute.
NOTE CONF
Right.
You can define that as an instance of numb.
NOTE CONF
Okay, I won't I won't tell you what the rest
of this thing is.
NOTE CONF
There's a lot more examples here.
You can look through them if you want.
NOTE CONF
Um, uh, ending up with expression trees.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay, that's enough for this lecture, though.
And, um, I'll carry on with a different topic tomorrow.
NOTE CONF
So thanks for your attention.
Mhm.
NOTE CONF
Hi.
I have a.
NOTE CONF
Couple of questions.
I think this is from last week's chapter.
NOTE CONF
The dates of chapter 21.
Chapter 21, and I'm kind of confused on did we
NOTE CONF
go through modules and week seven.
But we did a little bit quickly.
NOTE CONF
I mean, I explained each one of my examples, had
a module declaration with an import and with and with
NOTE CONF
this parenthesis list of exports.
So I did explain that it was pretty quick.
NOTE CONF
But um, you know, that was where I explained it
in that lecture.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Um, basically this topic is about how you can import
NOTE CONF
modules and also define functions and those modules that refer
to other functions.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
And how that can also go really wrong if.
If you, if you export.
NOTE CONF
Oh hi there.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Oh sorry.
I'm, I'm broadcasting.
NOTE CONF
How you.
I could leave you.
NOTE CONF
Say goodbye.
Everyone's gaining the broadband.
NOTE CONF
Wi-Fi seven on E makes every device work better.
Even yours.
NOTE CONF